## How to recover from a concussion
> I experienced a bad concussion or trauatic brain injury (TBI) and ironically learned a lot from it. While I won't say it was a fun experience, and it probably is not going to add anything to my long-term cognitive functioning, I am still grateful to have learned so much and grown as a person from the experience. They say pain is "the biggest motivator", or "where growth happens", or something similarly heartfelt. Well, I think that's true. As a neuroscience student, I am thankful that I had the motivation and resources to help me navigate my own health journey and really understand what was happening to me on a cellular level. I can only imagine how alienating and confusing concussions must be for people who do not know why they are feeling these symptoms. While this field of research is still very new, there are a few promising treatments available, such as omega-3, curcumin (antioxidants) and creatine supplementation.
I like to say that knowledge is power, and I want to empower others to regain their health, which is why I put together a slideshow and recorded an informational talk on my holistic concussion recovery journey, in hopes that it would inspire others to seek treatments and share their symptoms with their support network  to give insight on what a concussion really is. It's realy difficult to convey the scary symptoms that can accompany concussions unless you -heaven forbid- go through one yourself. Here is a [link to my concussion recovery slideshow](https://docs.google.com/presentation/d/1O8699A8tJiSB8LyywPFCP7YTitBrif0VHjsIlTgR0tQ/edit?usp=sharing) with links to more scientific research and support resources for dealing with TBI.

I have also learned so much about the importance of the vagus nerve and am blown away by how much of our physiology it controls and supports.
I would highly recommend reading the book called 'Activate Your Vagus Nerve: Unleash Your Body’s Natural Ability to Heal' by Dr. Navaz Habib or check out his [website](http://drhabib.ca/2016/07/activate-vagus-nerve/).
